2) Refactor into a 3-phase execution model (Commit → Reveal → Deepen)

This is the structural fix. The principle:

Commit must be fast and deterministic.

Reveal must start immediately (even if shallow).

Deepen can take time, and should stream.

Phase 1: COMMIT (hard budget: ~150–300ms)

Goal: Acknowledge the choice and lock it in.

What happens:

Validate choice

Apply purely deterministic state deltas (movement, XP, flags you already know)

Append a “ChoiceCommitted” trace event

Return an immediate response:

Return payload (example):

{
  "status": "committed",
  "commitId": "c_8f31",
  "choiceText": "Follow the newly revealed path...",
  "immediateDeltas": [
    {"path":"party.location","value":{"x":14,"y":8}},
    {"path":"character.28.experience","value":15520}
  ],
  "revealSeed": {
    "sceneId":"eld_path_14_8",
    "tone":"tense",
    "stakes":["unknown_presence","low_visibility"]
  }
}


UI behavior:

Immediately shows: choice is locked (no ambiguity)

Updates map/XPs instantly

Shows an in-world “turning moment” transition panel (not a spinner)

Phase 2: REVEAL (budget: ~300–900ms)

Goal: Give something true before the full prose exists.

How to generate it:

Use non-LLM or micro-LLM output:

deterministic “Outcome Summary” template

tiny model call with minimal context

or cached “first paragraph shell”

Reveal content should be:

2–4 sentences

high-confidence, low-detail

never contradict later Deepen output

Return payload:

{
  "status":"reveal",
  "commitId":"c_8f31",
  "revealText":[
    "You take the narrow path into the darker cut between the trees.",
    "The air cools and the forest noise thins, as if something is listening.",
    "Ahead, the trail bends out of sight."
  ],
  "uiCues":[
    {"type":"audio","cue":"forest_low"},
    {"type":"highlight","target":"map.hex.14.8"}
  ]
}


UI behavior:

Player starts reading immediately.

You can already animate “new hex discovered,” “light level drops,” etc.

Phase 3: DEEPEN (budget: 1–8s, streamed)

Goal: Deliver the rich narrative + choices + any complex consequences.

What happens:

Full LLM call with full context

Structured extraction

Downstream scene availability computation

New choice set generation

Logging and persistence (can be partially async)

Return:

stream tokens into the narrative panel

send a final “choices ready” packet at the end

Key rule: Deepen is allowed to take time because Reveal already eliminated dead air.

3) Decide what Everdice is allowed to say before it knows everything

This is the part that prevents contradictions.

Safe to say early (Commit/Reveal)

These are “high-confidence” statements that will almost never be invalidated:

A. Confirmation of player action

“You step onto the path.”

“You push the door open.”

“You call out into the dark.”

B. Immediate sensory shift

lighting, sound, temperature, smell

“The air cools.” “The corridor narrows.” “Your voice dies quickly.”

C. Non-committal tension

“Something feels off.”

“You get the sense you’re not alone.”

“For a moment, everything goes quiet.”

D. Spatial facts you already computed

movement to a hex

entering a known location

“You reach the edge of the clearing.” (if deterministic)

E. Stakes framing without resolution

“This choice may draw attention.”

“If there’s a trap, you’ll find it the hard way.” (conditional framing)

Not safe to say early

These are the things that cause “the system lied” feelings if they change:

Exact NPC identity (“It’s Captain Varrin”) unless already known

Combat initiation (“Roll initiative”) unless already committed

Loot/results (“You find a key”) unless deterministic

Specific injuries/status effects

Explicit unlock/foreclose claims (“This closes the village arc”) unless computed

Any hard factual claims about unseen rooms (“There are three guards”) unless you already know

The canonical Reveal contract (1 paragraph rule)

Reveal must be written so it can be true in all Deepen branches.

A great Reveal paragraph uses:

action confirmation

environment shift

a hook line that implies consequence without specifying it

Example template:

“You do X. The environment shifts in Y way. A hook suggests Z, without naming Z.”